+++
title = 'Re-defining CTO'
date = 2026-01-01T11:00:00
draft = false
+++

# Re-defining CTO

Some time ago I ran into the blog post Greg Brockman, now best known as OpenAI co-founder, wrote over 10 years ago about becoming the CTO at Stripe ([#define CTO](https://blog.gregbrockman.com/figuring-out-the-cto-role-at-stripe)). His approach of "I hired a people person to do the people things and started to do more coding" struck a chord. I guess most tech managers with a development background sometimes wish they could do that. It naturally made me re-evaluate my poor life choices but it also made me realize that there is no rulebook that says what actually a CTO's responsibilities are. This made me want to write this blog post and try to figure out where I went wrong, what it is that a CTO means and what a CTO should be doing.

I am writing from the viewpoint of someone who has glimpsed very little outside the ICT sector so I have no idea how CTO's are considered in other corners of our economy.

# About my background

So I'm most definitely NOT Greg Brockman. I've lived and worked in Finland my whole life. I did not do any serious programming until university but I started developing professionally in 2010. I worked in a small company (20+ people) producing software for the healthcare sector. I left the company at one point for half a year but was then hired back to be the new engineering manager. The company founder asked what I thought my title should be and I went with "CTO" mostly because my predecessor was also titled CTO and that meant less paperwork. The company had a quality management system (QMS) in place and the documentation referred to "CTO" in a lot of places.

I worked as a CTO there for five years then a couple of years as a "Development Manager" doing somewhat similar things in a bigger company (500+ people) and now for a couple of years as a CTO again in an even bigger company (1700+ people) but only responsible for a specific business unit. I have 30+ tech people counting direct and indirect reports, and I find myself doing a mixed bag of what I did in my first two jobs. There are a lot of interesting similarities and differences between my responsibilities in all of these jobs. Sometimes I've thought that my title fits very well and sometimes I've thought that all titles are meaningless and nothing matters.

So for close to 10 years now I've been trying to find out what it is that makes a CTO and whether me and my role definition were up to that standard. Here's what I think at the moment.

# What even are job titles?

I think most job titles are arbitrary because most organizations are ultimately arbitrary in organizing themselves. Some aspects of organizational structures, roles and responsibilities are dictated by laws and other regulations but rarely job titles themselves. All organizations tend to evolve around their specific idiosyncrasies and tend to be subtly different even if they like to use similar terms to describe themselves. "Project organization" or "startup culture" can mean very different things in different companies even if they appear similar. I think smart and successful companies realize this and adapt their organization structure to match their culture, turning this difference into a competitive edge. Job titles are one part of this structure.

Job titles do carry different connotations and meanings that somewhat align thanks to our shared cultural ethos. A job title is a message to the person receiving that title, their colleagues and 3rd parties. Naming someone a CTO can then tell the person themselves that "you are now in charge of our tech department", their subordinates that "this guy is now in charge", and customers that "we take R&D seriously". Similarly, naming your data engineer Chief AI Officer tells them "I don't really understand what it is that you do", their co-workers "It is ok not to understand what they do" and investors "our valuation just grew 10x". So when choosing job titles we should be thinking about the message we are sending and whether it will make it easier or harder for someone to understand how our organization operates. Even letting people pick their own titles like "UX Shinobi" sends a message. That message is usually "We make so much revenue (or investor money) that we haven't bothered to figure out what people really do here. Also everyone in this company watches a bunch of anime."

So, if we accept the premise that we are not bound by any official rulebook, when should one decide to name a CTO? I think that when a technology or a bunch of technologies developed by a company are critical for its future success it is wise to send a message that says "this thing we are doing is so significant that company management took notice and put an entire person with actual decision-making power on the case". CTO is a term very well understood in the ICT sector so I'm pretty sure that at least there the message is well understood. A less emphatic message would be naming a "Head of Technology/Software" or "VP of software engineering" etc.

I think now we can give a rough definition of what a CTO is: CTO is a person who has been given a strong mandate (responsibilities and powers) to advance a company's mission by managing their technology portfolio.

# The mandate

"With great responsibilities comes great power. With a lot of pain in the ass comes great compensation." These are the rules I think that companies should adhere to when designing any senior positions.

Much of the power in organizations comes down to spending money. A person in a CTO role should have an independent budget allocation as well as the power to design the smartest way to spend that budget. Obviously someone promoted from within the developer ranks is not likely to have a lot of experience in budgeting so they will need some time to get up to speed. The power to hire and fire in the limits set by employment laws and the budget should also be up to the CTO as well. In most cases* the CTO should also have a seat in the company's executive board. If you are not willing to cede this much power to the engineering manager you should probably re-think the title and maybe also how you want to design your organization. At some point the "big compensation" part also becomes counter-productive. If you cannot shape the role so that it would fit a technically minded person, should you actually be hiring a COO or some other title that would attract people that are specialized in handling non-technical leadership stuff?

CTO is a position that combines technical know-how with leadership skills. An ideal candidate has a good understanding of both areas. Generally tech people tend to focus on doing tech things which in turn means that they will have areas of responsibility that feel cumbersome or uncomfortable to them. This means that the CTO position should be well compensated. Obviously there are people who want to progress in their career and are willing to take the position just to have the title in their CV but in the long run they will want a position where the title comes with appropriate benefits. If the pain-in-the-ass compensation grows too large, however, it probably means that either you're trying to fill the wrong position or recruit the wrong person. If the position is not technical in nature, you shouldn't be recruiting a CTO in the first place and if the person finds all non-coding aspects of the work to be frustrating, maybe they are not a good fit as a CTO.

* Currently I am not on my company's executive board because software is just one department inside the company. I think this is a rational decision. I do have control over my budget, hiring and we have a software-specific nerd executive board that gives me enough of a voice in the company.

# Big-T vs small-t chiefs

How should a CTO then pursue their mandate? Working from my argument that both job titles and organizations are arbitrary the answer is obviously that "it depends". It is important that the CTO both a) finds the most efficient way to personally contribute to execution of their mandate and b) ensures that efficient leadership takes place in the organization that they are leading. Generally though there probably are best practices to be found if we look outside this post-modernist deconstruction of leadership.

Most of the discussion on the web regarding CTO's job description is focused on the matter of whether a CTO should be involved in actual development and to what degree. I like to use the terms big-T and small-t CTO to describe the two castes of supreme technical leaders. Based on the discussions I've had and found online most tech leaders are somewhere in-between the t-size-spectrum and finding the right balance is a struggle. Big t:s are always at risk of failing their extra-technical duties because they are pulled into more easily managed, instantly rewarding and familiar development tasks. Small-t:s have to grapple with the sinking feeling of realizing they are not as technically savvy any more as they used to be yet they have to be the ultimate technical decision maker.

Generally the requirement for non-technical leadership duties grows with the company size which means that the T-size is negatively correlated with the company size. This is caused by both a larger (and usually then more complex) organization, more accumulated technology to chief about than one man can handle and increased requirements for regulatory activities like information security and data protection. This should be partially offset by the possibility to recruit middle-management and specialists to whom the CTO can delegate some of their responsibilities.

# Delegation

I think that more than anything it is the capability to delegate that determines how well developers turned technical leaders can adjust to their new life between technology and management. At some point - likely from the inception of a newfound engineering manager - the workload becomes unmanageable unless some thoughtful delegation is performed. Even though the technically capable leaders have a huge edge in decision making and technology selection when compared to leaders without a technology background, this one aspect is where the technological experience can render a leader all but useless. It feels absolutely awful to delegate when you are used to being the person who knows best and does the best too. Instructing someone else may take more time than doing something yourself but you still know you should do it anyway because you can't do everything yourself. The CEO (or whomever is supervising the CTO) can provide great assistance by showing appreciation of delegation and other managerial efforts and not just technical accomplishments.

Thoughtful delegation requires constant evaluation of whether one task or the other should be performed by another person in the organization. There are multiple reasons to delegate a task or a responsibility. The most important reason is probably to delegate all tasks that can be performed sufficiently well by others to make time for the leadership tasks that only the leader can do. But it is also necessary to delegate things when it is not necessarily clear that the task recipient will perform optimally. Sometimes people must be allowed to fail to learn and test their skillset. It is a common mistake to only delegate menial tasks and keep all the important design and development tasks for the head honcho. Often more risky delegation decisions require some supervision which again takes up time. Unfortunately this means that it is easy to fall into the trap of "I don't have time to delegate this stuff so I'll keep doing it until I die of a massive stress-induced heart attack".

I can also see the opposite problem in my current position. We have very capable tech leads in the organization who can guide their teams and perform their duties very independently. It would be sometimes useful to be more involved in the development process to be able to make better big picture decisions but it is difficult to inject yourself in the process without risking micromanagement. Staying in touch then requires more conversations, review meetings, demos and other artifacts that take away from the leanness of the organization.

# TODO and NOT-TODO

So what should the CTO be doing with all of that time that they gain by delegating away all tasks that they can? Firstly they should be keeping an eye on their organization and constantly asking themselves whether the things being done currently advance their mission optimally. Secondly they should always be looking outwards and championing their cause in the organization. Unless you happen to be in the latest wave of infinitely funded hype technology unicorns, all organizations have finite resources. If someone is not there to explain why those resources should be invested into technology they will be invested into marketing, sales, fancy office spaces or latte art.

Ultimately the CTO is responsible for making sure that all tech things that must happen do happen. This means either delegating, purchasing or doing them yourself. Someone has to design the product architecture, plan roadmaps, hire and train people, take charge of information security, design documentation, oversee quality and do all those little things that are required to keep a software company churning along. In a smaller company "doing them yourself" or at least "overseeing them yourself" method of a big-T CTO is more often the answer than in a larger company but everyone has to find their own pareto-optimal management mix optimizing by time, money and their specific skill-set.

While in practice the CTO actually has to do all of those things that they cannot eliminate, delegate, purchase or ignore, it would be wise to not let the job description become a patchwork of constant context switches. That is a surefire way to eliminate any chance to succeed in tackling more strategic issues. A CTO should treat their own job description as they would those of others. No one is going to stick around in a lead developer position where they also have to fetch the mail. Biting the bullet on some menial tasks might be a good way to show that no one in the organization is above doing the work but more than that means wasting a limited and expensive resource. In my first CTO job my biggest mistake was accepting the quality manager duties when the previous QM left the company. In the short term it was the easiest solution because I already knew how to do those tasks but it also made sure I always had some priority 2 items past their due-date. Afterwards I never had any flexibility in my schedule and couldn't find time for anything that was not urgent.

# Summary

CTO is a person who has been given a mission and executive powers to advance a company's technology portfolio. They pursue that mandate by combining their deep technical expertise with leadership skills, the correct balance of which depends on the situation. Generally there is more demand for non-technical work in larger companies but the CTO should find ways to keep up-to-date so that they do not lose their edge. A CTO must make sure that all necessary work is completed by delegating, purchasing or doing it themselves. Finding the right mix is situational but they should ensure prioritizing the work with long-term sustainability in mind.

Many of these aspects are shared by all leadership positions. In my opinion both the necessity and possibility of maintaining a deep understanding of the subject matter while simultaneously leading a sizable organization is what sets CTO's apart from most roles.

As an anecdote, when I was a freshly minted young CTO and took part in events held for senior tech leaders, I was often blown away by how out of touch some senior executives were---especially in regards to technology. Many seemed totally disinterested in really understanding anything new and I stopped going to these events altogether because they just made me fear for my future as a has-been blowhard. So if you are an engineering manager that still has a good grasp on current technology at least conceptually and a willingness to learn: Kudos! You have a leg up on a bunch of people in the industry.
